We can also write the subnet mask in slash '/' notation. 255.255.255.0
is writing it in decimal notation.
So, the example here, 255.255.255.0,
we can write that out, the subnet mask, and you see there is the line between the network portion and the host
portion.
And as we covered earlier, it's always contiguous 1's and then followed by a block of contiguous 0's.
Because it's contiguous,
we can count how many 1's that we have in a row.
So the example here, we have got 24 1's in a row. I know that each of these blocks is an octet, they each equal
to 8.
That's 8, 16, 24. So 255.255.255.0,
we can write it like that in dotted decimal notation.
Another way we can write is /24.
Those two things both mean exactly the same thing.
If we had 255.255.0.0 as a subnet mask, we could write that as /16, and so on. And whenever
you configure a Cisco router or switch on IOS, when you configure the IP address and the subnet mask,
you have to write the subnet mask out in the full dotted decimal notation. But whenever we're having a conversation
with somebody, or if we are creating a network diagram, more commonly, we will use slash notation because
it's not much fun to be saying 255.255.255.0 all the time.
It's much easier to say /24. Also, /24 takes up much less space on your network diagrams,
so you can have your diagrams looking a lot neater and tidier.
There was the network portion for a /24 highlighted.
Let's look at
another example coming up. Again, we're looking at a /24 there.
So the other example is for IP address 10.10.10.15 /255.0.0.0, and hopefully,
you can just by looking at this, you're going to see that that's going to be a /8.
The more you get used to working with IP addresses and subnets, you'll very quickly be able to see where
the lines are by just looking at the actual address and mask.
So the example there, the IP address can be written as 10.10.10.15 255.0.0.0
or 10.10.10.15/8 when we're writing it out in full with a subnet mask.
An example here, the network address is 10.0.0.0/8.
I've put this in bold to highlight it because the network address is not 10.10.10.0
/8.
When we write this out, it's just the network portion of the address that we specify.
It's a /8, so it's only the first octet which is the network portion.
So, that is the 10. All the rest of the address,
the last three octets is the host portion.
So when we write this address, it would be 10.0.0.0/8, and the available addresses would be
10.0.0.1 for our first host. The last host would be 10.255.255.254.
We can't use 10.255.255.255 because that would be the broadcast address, and 10.0.0.0
is the network address.
Okay, that was everything I needed to tell you about the subnet mask for now, but we'll be covering it
in more and more detail as we go through the rest of this section.